Susan Sontag in her essay notes on Camp
often cited as the quintessential
document on Camp culture remarks in
association between gays and camp and as
she was writing in the 1960s she was
highlighting a very retroactive
depiction from her upbringing Baby Jane
had only just come out when this paper
was published this indicates that gay
attraction to overwrought and badly
depicted feminine archetypes was well
solidified long before 1981 when the
infamous Mommy Dearest premiered the
purported true story of growing up with
movie star Joan Crawford as a mother
through the process of imitation Baby
Jane Cleopatra Martha Eve Harrington and
Crawford herself are imitated here to
the point wherein Faye dunaway's mind
playing Joan Crawford this is a
perfectly nuanced depiction of holly
Woods archetypal movie star John Waters
described Mommy Dearest as the first
drag queen role played by a woman and
he's not wrong but it seems to be
completely by accident films that are
accidental Camp are kind of rare without
clear intent failed Camp either goes so
big that it looks cheap and we
disconnect or they don't go big enough
either way we don't make a point of
remembering those movies so when one
does manage to hit the right buttons
we hold on to it for dear life so enter
Mommy Dearest first published as a book
by Christina Crawford in 1978 describing
her torturous relationship with her
mother Joan one year after Joan's death
in 1977. the story is about a daughter
who is struggling to reconcile her love
for an abusive parent which
would have made a great movie in no time
at all Studios snatched up the rights to
the story and Christina herself wrote a
script when Faye Dunaway was cast in the
lead role riding on her Oscar from
1977's Network the studio and Fey
herself wanted to restructure the script
to center around Crawford with Faye's
husband who she managed to make a
producer on the film trying to sanitize
Joan and Christina's husband being
accused of trying to turn Joan into a
monster so
what Joan did we get the film opens with
dunaway's Crawford Hollywood queen
musing about how despite her success in
global Allure she feels like there's
just something missing from her life yes
her career is in a bit of a slump but
she isn't as concerned about that
because she thinks that just means that
now is a great time to become a mother
unable to Bear children she begins to
suggest the option of adoption to her
then boyfriend and Hollywood lawyer Greg
sabat who helps her pull the strings she
needs to pull to have an adoption agency
hand her a baby this scene is played
entirely straight by the way this visual
pulls Crawford to the center of
attention like a rifenstall-esque
monarch or Idol once again unnecessary
Pathos and all this unnecessary pathos
feeds into this lofty visual language of
Jones Perfection channeled through
Dunaway we're only five minutes in and
no it does not slow down from here the
First Act of the film explores the
strange power dynamic between Joan and
her young daughter Christina this is
where most of the iconic scenes of the
movie come from because this is where
Joan is depicted at her most unhinged
now how can one of the most powerful
actresses in Hollywood's history have a
struggle for power
with a child well that's something that
critics slam the script for there isn't
really any textual reason for why Joan
is such a terror to her family there's
no reason why Joan is triggered at the
sight of a wire hanger or why
Christopher has to wear a harness to bed
which feeds into the insanity of this
role there are all of these compulsions
but no exploration as to why the surface
level of the analysis is out to
seemingly use Joan to subvert the
expectations of a Hollywood star Someone
For Whom the public laud is the ideal of
perfection in Womanhood though in
reality is a monster in her private life
when cameras are on she's Joan Crawford
when they're off she's a woman who is
desperately trying to keep everyone in
line so that she can be Joan Crawford
already the gays are on board for that
we love expose on fakeness feels like
gossip with substance guilt-free
relating to our personal lives a lot of
queer people people in the community
come from families that an outsider
would say are ideal but for those of us
who have to live with our parents
homophobic attitudes that Perfection is
a little
different behind closed doors parents
often let nasty things slip when they're
away from polite company and that's
doubly complicated because it means
nobody believes you especially nowadays
when bigotry isn't quite so in Vogue
parents still do and say homophobic and
transphobic [ __ ] but they do get a
little gas lady about it dare I say
Shady I've even heard of situations
especially from trans people where their
own therapists will try convincing them
that they're making up their parents
transphobia however just because there's
no surface reading doesn't mean that
explanations aren't inferred which is
mostly on fade unaway for sucking up
every drop of attention away from any
deeper analysis look a little deeper
into Jones parenting in Christina's
early life and especially Jones
biographical context and you guessed it
there's a commentary about youth and
Beauty in multiple instances in Mommy
Dearest whenever it seems that Christina
is coming of age as a lady Jones sees
that as competition from living out a
fantasy and the spotlight to taking a
few tricks from Jones own book on how to
flirt with men Christina is a threat to
Jones Reign Christina is both a rival a
symbol of her fading youth a child a
miniature version of Joan within whom
she can place all her expectations and
an opportunity to exercise her Authority
Christina must be better than Joan but
also Joan must use Christina to prove
that she's still at the top of her game
she both pushes Christina beyond what is
reasonable to expect of a little girl
and also smugly Revels in Christina's
failures often resorting to humiliating
Christina as a punishment for either not
being perfect or for seemingly
encroaching on Jones reign
don't tell me
yeah I know you look awful you'll be
quiet you're always rummaging through my
drawers trying to find a way to make
people look at you while you're always
looking at yourself in the mirror why
are you doing that tell me Joan is so
fixated on Perfection that she can't
handle it when things don't quite fall
into place following several poor
performing films MGM releases Joan from
her contract this compiles with a string
of failed romances and triggers a
Cascade of Jones Greatest fears her
beauty something she felt was her
primary asset
is fading but what terrifies her is that
she does not have the talent to make up
for it in her defense yes MGM was
shafting her as a human being she was
aging but they continued to cast her in
roles as if she was the Joan Crawford
that she was 15 years prior instead of
I don't know letting her play more
mature roles they just cut her loose
because she wasn't ageless Joan Crawford
it is implied held herself up to
Perfection because she accurately
assumed that a single slip up
would have her thrown to the dogs and
when that fear was validated we can
expect some erratic Behavior which gives
us one of the most iconic scenes in Camp
history
so Hollywood is an absurd place it's why
movies about Hollywood generally don't
click with General audiences because
it's a place like no other so you're
already in absurd territory but instead
of mitigating the absurdity and
explaining the kind of anxieties and
pressure that exist in this place
there's Joan down on the ground hacking
away at roses in a
gorgeous beaded gown and that line
delivery Tina
bring me the air where each word is
punctuated with an entirely distinct and
separate emotion it's a complete sensory
overload and honestly
though the quote gets thrown around fans
of the scene are missing two of the best
parts first the fact that they actually
committed to a wide shot of fey hacking
away at that orange tree in that gown
ah
second Jones says bring me the ax the ax
the ax not bring me an ax bring me the
ax in the literal syntactic text of the
movie we can gauge that this is a
regular Occurrence at the Crawford
household because Christina didn't
Flinch and she knew exactly which acts
to get and where to get it
I feel as if the movie had done even the
slightest amount of work to bring out
the aforementioned subtext you could
pull off this exact scene as a harrowing
self-destruction of Jones psyche reading
into it Joan feels her perfect garden
must match her internalized feeling of
inadequacy if MGM tells her that she's
not perfect
then there's no point in having anything
perfect around why should something be
more perfect than her if being perfect
was her only value it could be a really
gripping scene the problem is that
without adequate build up or actual
exploration of Jones emotions
instead with Dunaway opting to depict
these emotions as mood swings this scene
comes out of nowhere it's also worth
mentioning that this film doesn't really
follow a narrative we go from Jones
celebrating her long-awaited Oscar win
and the winner is
directly into no water hi guys ever
which again
could be a legitimately terrifying scene
if there was any kind of narrative
consequentialism that said when it comes
to abusive households there's usually
this soft reset button at the end of the
episode where there's an unspoken
agreement to leave it in the past at
least when it involves younger children
which in and of itself is a really eerie
and unsettling concept though Mommy
Dearest does absolutely nothing to
establish this precedence with spoken or
visual language and no the abuse does
not end with Jones shipping Christina
off to boarding school which it is
implied Joan was doing because she
observed her daughter beginning to
experiment with flirting not on her
watch when Christina is caught kissing a
boy at the school she's reprimanded by
the administration but Joan insists that
she be expelled for some reason and
instead pulls Christina out of the
school now as it turned out Beyond just
kissing boys Christina ended up quite
enjoying her time away from her mother
at the boarding school and given that
the discipline obsessed Joan originally
intended private school to be a
punishment enjoying a punishment is also
so something that will not happen on her
watch leading to another iconic scene
Barbara please
Barbara
bringing Christina home as she has an
interview schedule Joan coiley if not
proudly remarks that Christina was
expelled after telling Christina not to
talk about the expulsion I can't think
of a single parent who would gloat about
their child's expulsion
but to Joan it's almost like a victory a
failure for a rival is a victory for her
Christina points out to the reporter
that she was not in fact expelled
twitched Joan throws a fit over being
accused of lying even though
she was lying why do you deliberately
defy me why did you tell her I got
expelled because you did get expelled
when Christina calls her out Joan just
goes right on and slaps her in front of
the reporter and then blames her for
making her embarrass herself in front of
the reporter you
you'll be in front of a reporter
Joan begins to spiral aimlessly with
such and such parental insults about
gratitude but it seems like Christina is
done with this song and dance and asks
why Joan bothered to adopt her if Joan
didn't seem to want anything to do with
Christina why did you adopt me
for a little extra publicity
tensions rise and why can't
why can't you get on the street because
I am not one of your fans
and now we're getting into the territory
of Christina's accounts that can be
backed up by fact fact number one
is that yes Joan really did replace
Christina on a soap opera that Christina
was cast in Joan in her 60s takes the
role of a 28 year old woman while
Christina is recovering from a benign
ovarian tumor fact number two is another
iconic scene Joan Crawford was on the
board of directors for PepsiCo via her
husband the company was a nothing up
start to compete with the Behemoth that
was Coca-Cola Joan was brought on as a
brand ambassador and basically made the
company into what it was Joan married
the CEO and the board of directors did
try to force her out after his death in
the film this encounter is depicted with
Jones screaming into the boardroom
famously saying don't with me fellas and
though this is a famous line from the
film it's not the line that was lifted
from the secretary's notes of the
meeting but Joan did say to the
directors I fought worse monsters than
you for years in Hollywood I know how to
win the hard way ironically this is one
of dunaway's more understated lines in
the entire film this meeting in reality
was much more cordial than Dunaway
delivered why did it need to get turned
up to an 11.
why not that's why rounding off the film
is the reading of Joan Crawford's will
with Christina and Christopher when it
comes to what Joan left them Joan writes
that they will receive nothing
or reasons which are well known
to them
which was the literal reading of the
will
that happened that's the last thing
Christopher and Christina ever heard
from their mother and when asked
apparently neither of them
know what those reasons were there are
some suggestions that Joan wrote them
out of the will because she heard
Christina was already writing Mommy
Dearest while Joan was alive but that
doesn't explain why she Nicks
Christopher the film doesn't even
mention Jones younger two children who
she adopted just about the same time
that Christina went off to boarding
school funny timing that now as with all
great camp movies half of the fun is the
gossip and the making of Mommy Dearest
is no exception as mentioned Mommy
Dearest was a celebrity expose
Christina's account is a pained
tormented struggle between loving her
mother and recalling good memories of
Joan but also living through some
very traumatic abuse and behavior though
the way Hollywood figures talk about it
especially those who are close to Joan
even Betty Davis herself Christina makes
Joan out to be a demon that she wasn't
who's one of the worst people you know
in Hollywood that I worked with or that
she wouldn't want to work with again if
you don't you don't have one million
dollars pay done away but the book is
much tame her especially if your frame
of reference is the movie and honestly a
lot of the vitriol that gets slung at
Christina is well I never saw Joan beat
her children I never saw this happen
well I never saw Harvey Weinstein rape
anybody which you'd think in this post
me too believe victim society that
excuse wouldn't fly but Christina to
this day has haters I think Christine
was very very envious of Joan Crawford
and her public and her popularity and
her beauty Hollywood is said to be a
small town and the vitriol directed at
Christina May simply be them protecting
one of their own Christina does make a
point of specifically blaming Hollywood
for crafting Jones narcissism before the
fall of the studio system the studios
themselves would mold Their Stars into
fitting specific personality ideals to
put on errors not only for cameras but
for fans in private it was rare that
you'd get a star like Davis or Catherine
Hepburn who didn't bother with the
facade this is apparent in a documentary
called Bright Lights starring Carrie
Fisher and Debbie Reynolds
may they rest in peace Reynolds while
being interviewed still had her
signature Debbie Reynolds charm however
the documentary crew kept the cameras
rolling when Carrie took her aside from
around the corner Debbie's voice is much
weaker and more vulnerable even though
she was a woman in her 80s Debbie
Reynolds was a mask she had to wear for
the public luckily she did have a
supportive family with whom she didn't
have to wear it Christina's take seems
to be that Jones simply wasn't able to
take that mask off at all
and resorted to drastic Behavior
when the porcelain started to crack but
with all the hatred toward the story and
toward Christina
it does Boggle my mind that Hollywood
was so horny to get this movie made as
soon as the book came out you couldn't
find anyone who had anything good to say
about it Faye Dunaway herself agreed to
play the role as long as it was more
respectful to Jones memory
than the book though Christina's book
was obviously an exploitation book the
first one of its kind my task was to
portray a woman a full woman who she was
in all her facets not just one
I tried to illuminate who this woman was
but it was more than just about being
angry it was about trying to examine and
explore the forces that undermined her
I don't think Faye and I watched the
same movie Christina actually did not
feel the dunaway's performance
accurately depicted her mother
specifically claiming that dunaway's
depiction of Joan was far more monstrous
than she ever experienced is that
anywhere near the way Joan Crawford
actually acted only the makeup Faye
Dunaway specifically went out of her way
to manipulate the script the director
and producers to humanize Joan all the
while lambasting the book as tabloid
drivel only for the author of that
drivel to decry the performance for
depicting a monster it also didn't help
that Dunaway was already kind of a diva
once again ironically Joan Crawford was
quoted saying of all the actresses to me
only Faye Dunaway has the talent and the
class and the courage it takes to make a
real star Dunaway later blamed Mommy
Dearest for hurting her career and given
that she was a bit of a hot ticket
actress before the 80s she was forced
into roles in smaller films for the rest
of her life and on one hand you may say
it's because of her performance but
plenty of actors have had bad roles
maybe nothing so Monumental is this but
Faye was a bit of a hassle you see on
top of being a prima donna in general
she allegedly terrorized the set of
Mommy Dearest for starters she refused
to drop out of character during
production so on top of delivering
that on camera the crew and cast had to
live with that for weeks rutanya Alda
who played Jones assistant in the film
wrote a behind the scenes Memoir about
the filming experience she wrote people
despised Faye because she was rude to
people everyone was on pins and needles
when she worked and relaxed when she
didn't to name a few things Faye
allegedly manipulated the director to
Rob other actors of their screen time to
pull it to herself she also insisted
that people on set needed to turn away
from her while she was performing
because she didn't want an audience
regarding her method acting and will
avoid a discussion about what method
acting really is and how a lot of actors
misuse the term Dunaway had the usual
nonsense to say but with an extra twist
if your mind is on a woman who is dead
and you're trying to find out who she
was and do right by her you do feel a
presence
I felt it at home at night sometimes it
wasn't pleasant I felt Joan was not at
rest so I think what happened is that
Faye was so engaged with the memory of
Joan that she may have spurred a
vindictive streak against Christina and
so she kind of took out all that bottled
up rage
on the Effigy of Christina which is why
you got all this aggression I think well
there was an initial wave of critics who
hailed her performance it didn't take
long for the public perception to swing
the other way going down is one of the
best bad performances of all time a
serious actress like Faye Dunaway did
not cut into that idea she blamed the
director for not reeling her back she
blamed the editors and the producers for
taking her depiction of a window into a
tormented soul and making it Camp she
blamed Christina and her husband she
blamed Christina's book and worst of all
she blamed her audience for not taking
away her intended interpretation though
she has come around to the unforeseen
fandom of the film but still doesn't
quite get what they see in it because
make no mistake there is a fandom around
this moving picture little did Dunaway
know she had opened the floodgates to a
whole fandom that had only until then
existed in burlesque shows a fandom that
upon the movie's release would hang
Christina Crawford in effigy
Mommy Dearest
legitimized a whole group of audiences
and creators who were going to do what
Dunaway did
but do it on purpose
with or without the ghost of Joan
Crawford